# Make @safe the Default v2

| Field           | Value                                                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| DIP:            |                                                                 |
| Review Count:   |                                                                 |
| Author:         | Walter Bright walter@digitalmars.com / [Mark](markleaf131313@gmail.com) |
| Implementation: | https://github.com/dlang/dmd/pull/10709                         |
| Status:         |                                                                 |

## Abstract

Currently, D functions are `@system` by default. This DIP proposes changing the default to `@safe`.


## Contents
* [Rationale](#rationale)
* [Prior Work](#prior-work)
* [Description](#description)
* [Breaking Changes and Deprecations](#breaking-changes-and-deprecations)
* [Reference](#reference)
* [Copyright & License](#copyright--license)

## Rationale

When D was first developed, there was little interest in the extra safety checks
introduced by `@safe`. But as the costs of unsafe code have become ever more apparent
and expensive, and `@safe` has grown more capable, the balance has shifted. Users expect
safety to be opt-out, not opt-in.

Most code is naturally safe, which means it could be annotated `@safe` as-is or with minor transformations,
and true `@system` code should be relatively rare. It makes
sense that the common case―safe code―should be the default and not require an
annotation.


## Prior Work

* Other languages such as Rust and C# have safety as opt-out, rather than opt-in.
* A previous draft proposal: [@safe-by-default First Draft](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/pull/153)
* [DIP1028](https://github.com/dlang/DIPs/blob/master/DIPs/rejected/DIP1028.md)

## Description

Functions without explicit annotation will now be assumed to be `@safe` rather than `@system`,
except in cases where annotations are inferred, i.e. function templates, nested functions, and lambdas.

Because this is expected to break a lot of existing code, it will be enabled with the
new compiler switch `-preview=safedefault`.

There are no grammar changes.

## Breaking Changes and Deprecations

This will likely break most code that has not already been annotated with `@safe`,
`@trusted`, or `@system`. Programmers must annotate functions that can’t be `@safe` with `@system`.
Once the project compiles again successfully, start with the leaves marked `@system` and
modify as required to make them `@safe`.

In general, `@system` should not be applied to blocks of functions. It should be added
specifically to each function that requires it.

### C and C++ Functions

Any unmarked `extern(D)` function will now be considered `@safe` by default. If its implementation is not recompiled,
it will no longer link because the mangling will be different. However, for `extern(C)` and `extern(C++)` functions,
D's attributes are not part of the mangling and it will compile and link without error. This has always
relied on the user getting it correct.

Unmarked `extern(C)` and `extern(C++)` function declarations will retain `@system` as the default
because usually, their implementation is not in D and therefore can’t be checked,
but `extern(C)` and `extern(C++)` functions with function bodies will be `@safe` by default
and require an explicit `@system` annotation if they can’t be `@safe`.

### Third Party Libraries

It's best practice for third party libraries to use explicit safety annotations and not rely on defaults.
It is also best practice to compile those libraries with the same compiler that is being used
to compile the project.

### Virtual Functions

Because `@safe` function can override a `@system` function, but not vice-versa, with `@safe` becoming
the default, users may encounter compile errors when overriding a now-default `@safe` function with
a `@system` one.

## Reference

## Copyright & License
Copyright (c) 2019 by the D Language Foundation

Licensed under [Creative Commons Zero 1.0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode.txt)

